Foundations {#02:foundations}
===========

Introduction
------------

[r]{}[0.4]{} \[05:fig01\] ![image](gfx/02-desktop){width="40.00000%"}

Why do some researchers prefer charts and graphs while others seem to
like tables full of numbers? Why do some researchers work best with
computer tools while others tend to sketch their ideas on paper? Why are
some researchers driven by calendars and deadlines while others seem to
take their time? All of these questions are related to the philosophical
foundations that formed the researcher’s analytical perspective. This
chapter explores how the researcher’s foundations shape methodological
choices and the connection between paradigms, theories, and research
methods.

### Ontology and Epistemology {#02:ontology}

The principles of business research, like those of sociology and
psychology research, are founded on two major branches of philosophy:
and . Ontology concerns the nature of reality and the researcher’s
ontological position shapes the sorts of research questions posed and
how those questions are researched. Ontology posits two fundamental
positions:

-   : Things are real and exist regardless of any sort of social
    activity. This is often reflected in research about societal
    organization. Objectivists take the position that people may differ
    in their perception of reality but there is only one true reality
    and a researcher’s job is to discover that reality.

-   : Things do not just exist apart from the society that observes
    them. This is often reflected in research about culture and its
    influence on human activities. Constructivists take the position
    that reality is shaped individually and that a researcher’s job is
    to understand others’ view of reality.

Like ontology, epistemology has to do with knowledge. Rather than
dealing with questions about *what is*, epistemology deals with
questions of *how we know*.

Four main branches of epistemology are frequently encountered in
business research, and the researcher’s beliefs concerning these
branches will shape the research design.

-   accepts both personal experience and measured data as sources of
    knowledge. These researchers will usually design applied research
    projects that use different perspectives to help answer a question.

-   relies only on findings gained through measurement. These
    researchers tend to focus on causality and try to reduce phenomena
    to its simplest elements.

-   relies on observations rather than precise measures to provide
    credible facts and data. These researchers would use tools like
    structured interviews to gain an understanding of a phenomenon.

-   uses subjective explanations of social phenomena. These researchers
    use tools like ethnographic studies to attempt to understand an
    entire social structure.

In their seminal book *Sociological Paradigms and Organizational
Analysis*[@burrell2017sociological], Burrell and Morgan suggested that
epistemology shapes a researcher’s approach to a project, , should an
objective or subjective approach be used, while ontology shapes the
researcher’s interpretation of the findings, does the world consist
mostly of social order or radical change. Using these two sets of
assumptions, Burrell and Morgan categorized research as in Figure
\[02:fig01\].

=\[rectangle,draw=blue!50,fill=blue!20,ultra thick, inner
sep=10pt,minimum width=4.5cm,minimum height=2.0cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=red!50,fill=red!20,ultra thick, inner
sep=10pt,minimum width=4.5cm,minimum height=2.0cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=green!50,fill=green!20,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=4.5cm,minimum height=2.0cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=yellow!50,fill=yellow!20,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=4.5cm,minimum height=2.0cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[red\]

(radstr) [Radical Structure]{}; (radhum) \[right=0.5cm of radstr\]
[Radical Humanism]{}; (func) \[below=0.5cm of radstr\]
[Functionalism]{}; (interp) \[right=0.5cm of func\] [Interpretivism]{};

(ttext) \[above=0.5cm of radstr,xshift=2.5cm,yshift=-0.5cm\] [Radical
Change]{}; (btext) \[below=0.5cm of func,xshift=2.5cm,yshift=0.35cm\]
[Social Order]{}; (ltext) \[left=0.5cm of func,yshift=2.5cm,rotate=90\]
[Objectivism]{}; (rtext) \[right=0.5cm of
interp,yshift=2.5cm,rotate=270\] [Subjectivism]{};

(ttext) to (btext); (ltext) to (rtext);

-   is the mindset adopted by researchers who...

    -   Ontology: view the world as orderly and consisting of patterns
        of ordered events or behaviors.

    -   Epistemology: believe that the best way to study the world is to
        use an objective approach that is independent of the person
        conducting the observation by using standardized collection
        tools like surveys.

-   is the mindset adopted by researchers who...

    -   Ontology: view the world as orderly and consisting of patterns
        of ordered events or behaviors.

    -   Epistemology: believe that the best way to study the world is
        though the subjective interpretation of participants involved
        using techniques like interviewing participants and then
        reconciling differences using their own subjective perspectives.

-   is the mindset adopted by researchers who...

    -   Ontology: view the world as constantly changing, often
        radically, with few unvarying patterns or behaviors.

    -   Epistemology: believe that the best way to study the world is to
        use an objective approach that is independent of the person
        conducting the observation by using standardized collection
        tools like surveys.

-   is the mindset adopted by researchers who...

    -   Ontology: view the world as constantly changing, often
        radically, with few unvarying patterns or behaviors.

    -   Epistemology: believe that the best way to study the world is
        though the subjective interpretation of participants involved
        using techniques like interviewing participants and then
        reconciling differences using their own subjective perspectives.

To date, the majority of business research has emulated the natural
sciences and adopted functionalist techniques. Thus, researchers tend to
believe that social patterns can be understood in terms of their
functional components so they study those components in detail using
objective techniques like surveys and experimental research. However, a
small but growing number of researchers are adopting interpretivist
techniques and are attempting to understand social order using
subjective tools such as interviews and ethnographic studies. Radical
structuralism and radical humanism represents a negligible proportion of
business research because researchers are primarily concerned with
understanding generalizable patterns of behavior rather than
idiosyncratic or changing events. However, social and organizational
phenomena generally consists of elements of both order and change. For
instance, organizational success depends on formalized business
processes, work procedures, and job responsibilities, while being
simultaneously constrained by a constantly changing mix of competitors,
competing products, suppliers, and customer base in the business
environment. Therefore, to obtain a holistic understanding of phenomena
like the success of some businesses and failure of others may require a
multi-modal approach.

Paradigms and Theories
----------------------

The terms and are often used interchangeably in business and marketing
research although experts disagree about whether these are identical or
distinct concepts. This text makes a slight distinction between the two
ideas because thinking about each concept as analytically distinct
provides a useful framework for understanding the connections between
research methods and scientific ways of thinking.

### Paradigm

The researcher’s own frames of reference, or believe systems, form a
paradigm. Thus, if a researcher is, generally, functionalist in outlook
then that would be the paradigm used to design and conduct research
projects. Paradigms are usually quite complex and include facets of
upbringing, family influence, societal norms, and many other factors.
Paradigms are often hard to recognize, because they are implicit,
assumed, and taken for granted. However, recognizing paradigms is key to
making sense of and reconciling differences in peoples’ perceptions of
the same social phenomenon. For instance, why do liberals believe that
the best way to improve secondary education is to hire more teachers,
but conservatives believe that privatizing education (using such means
as school vouchers) are more effective in achieving the same goal? The
differences in two paradigms explains this conflict, liberals believe
more in labor (i.e., in having more teachers and schools) while
conservatives place more faith in competitive markets (i.e., in free
competition between schools competing for education dollars).

Paradigms are like “colored glasses” that govern how people structure
their thoughts about the world. As one other example, imagine that a
certain technology was successfully implemented in one organization but
failed miserably in another. A researcher using a “rational lens” will
look for rational explanations of the problem such as inadequate
technology or poor fit between technology and the task context where it
is being utilized. Another research looking at the same problem through
a “social lens” may seek out social deficiencies such as inadequate user
training or lack of management support. Yet another researcher seeing it
through a “political lens” will look for instances of organizational
politics that may subvert the technology implementation process. Hence,
subconscious paradigms often constrain the concepts that researchers
attempt to measure and their subsequent interpretations of those
measures. However, it is likely that all of the above paradigms are at
least partially correct and a fuller understanding of the problem may
require an application of multiple paradigms.

Two paradigms are commonly found in business research:

-   . This is the framework that usually comes to mind when people think
    about research[^1]. Positivism is guided by the principles of
    objectivity, knowability, and deductive logic[^2]. The positivist
    framework operates from the assumption that society can and should
    be studied empirically and scientifically. Positivism also calls for
    value-free research where researchers attempt to abandon their own
    biases and values in a quest for objective, empirical, and knowable
    truth. Positivism is based on the works of French philosopher
    Auguste Comte (1798 - 1857) and was the dominant scientific paradigm
    until the mid-20th century. Unfortunately, positivism eventually
    evolved to empiricism or a blind faith in observed data and a
    rejection of any attempt to extend or reason beyond observable
    facts. Since human thoughts and emotions could not be directly
    measured, there were not considered to be legitimate topics for
    scientific research.

-   . Frustrations with the strictly empirical nature of positivist
    philosophy led to the development of postmodernism during the
    mid-late 20th century. Postmodernism argues that one can make
    inferences about a phenomenon by combining empirical observations
    with logical reasoning. Postmodernists view science as not certain
    but probabilistic (i.e., based on many contingencies), and often
    seek to explore these contingencies to understand social reality
    better. The postmodernist camp has further fragmented into
    subjectivists, who view the world as a subjective construction of
    our minds rather than as an objective reality, and critical
    realists, who believe that there is an external reality that is
    independent of a person’s thinking but we can never know such
    reality with any degree of certainty.

### Theory

#### Definition

are explanations of a natural or social behavior, event, or phenomenon.
More formally, a scientific theory is a system of constructs (concepts)
and propositions (relationships between those constructs) that
collectively presents a logical, systematic, and coherent explanation of
a phenomenon of interest within some assumptions and boundary
conditions[@bacharach1989organizational] It is important to note that
people not familiar with scientific research often view a theory as some
sort of speculation, a “guess,” and statements like “it’s only a theory”
are common. However, a scientific theory is well-researched and based on
repeated observations of some phenomenon. As an example, plate tectonics
is a theory which indicates that the continents are slowly moving across
the earth’s surface. This is a well-established theory based on research
spanning decades of observations, not just some sort of idle
speculation. A good scientific theory should be well supported using
observed facts and also have practical value. Karl Marx once wrote,
“Practice without theory is blind. Theory without practice is sterile.
Theory becomes a material force as soon as it is absorbed by the
masses.”[@marx1971contribution] Hence, both theory and practice are
important aspects of research.

Theories should explain *why* things happen rather than just describe or
predict. Note that it is possible to predict events or behaviors using a
set of predictors without necessarily explaining why such events are
taking place. For instance, market analysts predict fluctuations in the
stock market based on market announcements, earnings reports of major
companies, and new data from the Federal Reserve and other agencies,
based on previously observed correlations. Prediction requires only
correlation while explanation requires causation. Establishing causation
entails three conditions:

1.  Correlations between two constructs

2.  Temporal precedence (the cause must precede the effect in time)

3.  Rejection of alternative hypotheses (through testing)

It is also important to understand what theory is not. Theory is not
data, facts, typologies, taxonomies, or empirical findings. A collection
of facts is not a theory, just as a pile of stones is not a house.
Likewise, a collection of constructs (e.g., a typology of constructs) is
not a theory, because theories must go well beyond constructs to include
propositions, explanations, and boundary conditions. Data, facts, and
findings operate at the empirical or observational level, while theories
operate at a conceptual level and are based on logic rather than
observations.

There are many benefits to using theories in research. First, theories
provide the underlying logic explaining the occurrence of phenomena by
describing the key drivers, outcomes, and underlying processes that are
responsible for that phenomenon. Second, theories aid in sense-making by
synthesizing prior findings within a framework. Third, theories provide
guidance for future research by helping identify constructs and
relationships that are worthy of further research. Fourth, theories
contribute to the cumulative body of knowledge and bridge gaps between
other theories by reevaluating those theories in a new light.

However, theories can also have their own share of limitations. As
simplified explanations of reality, theories may not always provide
adequate explanations of the phenomena of interest. Theories are
designed to be simple and parsimonious explanations, while reality is
usually significantly more complex. Furthermore, theories may impose
blinders or limit researchers’ “range of vision,” causing them to miss
out on important concepts that are not defined by the theory.

#### Building Blocks of a Theory

David Whetten[@whetten1989constitutes] suggests that there are four
building blocks of a theory:

1.  capture the “what” of theories (i.e., what concepts are important
    for explaining a phenomenon). They are abstract concepts specified
    at a high level of abstraction that are chosen specifically to
    explain the phenomenon of interest. Constructs may be unidimensional
    (i.e., embody a single concept), such as weight or age, or
    multi-dimensional (i.e., embody multiple underlying concepts), such
    as personality or culture. While some constructs, such as age,
    education, and firm size, are easy to understand, others, such as
    creativity, prejudice, and organizational agility, may be more
    complex and abstruse, and still others such as trust, attitude, and
    learning, may represent temporal tendencies rather than steady
    states. Nevertheless, all constructs must have clear and unambiguous
    operational definition that should specify exactly how the construct
    will be measured and at what level of analysis (individual, group,
    organizational, etc.). Measurable representations of abstract
    constructs are called variables. For instance, intelligence quotient
    (IQ score) is a variable that is purported to measure an abstract
    construct called intelligence. As noted earlier, scientific research
    proceeds along two planes: a theoretical plane and an empirical
    plane. Constructs are conceptualized at the theoretical plane, while
    variables are operationalized and measured at the empirical
    (observational) plane. Furthermore, variables may be independent,
    dependent, mediating, or moderating. The distinction between
    constructs (conceptualized at the theoretical level) and variables
    (measured at the empirical level) is shown in Figure 4.1.

2.  capture the “how” (i.e., how are these concepts related to each
    other). They are associations postulated between constructs based on
    deductive logic. Propositions are stated in declarative form and
    should ideally indicate a cause-effect relationship (e.g., if X
    occurs, then Y will follow). Note that propositions may be
    conjectural but *must* be testable, and should be rejected if they
    are not supported by empirical observations. However, like
    constructs, propositions are stated at the theoretical level, and
    they can only be tested by examining the corresponding relationship
    between measurable variables of those constructs. The empirical
    formulation of propositions, stated as relationships between
    variables, is called hypotheses. The distinction between
    propositions (formulated at the theoretical level) and hypotheses
    (tested at the empirical level) is depicted in Figure 4.1.

3.  represents the “why” (i.e., why are these concepts related). Logic
    provides the basis for justifying the propositions as postulated.
    Logic acts like a “glue” that connects the theoretical constructs
    and provides meaning and relevance to the relationships between
    these constructs. Logic also represents the “explanation” that lies
    at the core of a theory. Without logic, propositions will be ad hoc,
    arbitrary, and meaningless, and cannot be tied into a cohesive
    “system of propositions” that is the heart of any theory.

4.  (sometimes called “assumptions”) examines the “who, when, and where”
    (i.e., under what circumstances will these concepts and
    relationships work). All theories are constrained by assumptions
    about values, time, and space, and boundary conditions that govern
    where the theory can be applied and where it cannot be applied. For
    example, many economic theories assume that human beings are
    rational (or boundedly rational) and employ utility maximization
    based on cost and benefit expectations as a way of understand human
    behavior. In contrast, political science theories assume that people
    are more political than rational, and try to position themselves in
    their professional or personal environment in a way that maximizes
    their power and control over others. Given the nature of their
    underlying assumptions, economic and political theories are not
    directly comparable, and researchers should not use economic
    theories if their objective is to understand the power structure or
    its evolution in a organization. Likewise, theories may have
    implicit cultural assumptions (e.g., whether they apply to
    individualistic or collective cultures), temporal assumptions (e.g.,
    whether they apply to early stages or later stages of human
    behavior), and spatial assumptions (e.g., whether they apply to
    certain localities but not to others). If a theory is to be properly
    used or tested, all of its implicit assumptions that form the
    boundaries of that theory must be properly understood.
    Unfortunately, theorists rarely state their implicit assumptions
    clearly, which leads to frequent misapplications of theories to
    problem situations in research.

#### Variables

A term frequently associated with, and sometimes used interchangeably
with, a construct is a . Etymologically speaking, a variable is a
quantity that can vary (e.g., from low to high, negative to positive,
etc.), in contrast to constants that do not vary (i.e., remain
constant). However, in scientific research, a variable is a measurable
representation of an abstract construct. As abstract entities,
constructs are not directly measurable, and hence, we look for proxy
measures called variables. For instance, a person’s intelligence is
often measured as his or her IQ (intelligence quotient) score, which is
an index generated from an analytical and pattern-matching test
administered to people. In this case, intelligence is a construct (a
concept), and the IQ score is a variable that measures that construct.
Whether IQ scores truly measures one’s intelligence is anyone’s guess
(though many believe that they do), and depending on whether how well it
measures intelligence, the IQ score may be a good or a poor measure of
the intelligence construct.

Depending on their intended use, variables may be classified as

Independent.

:   Explain other variables.

Dependent.

:   Are explained by other variables.

Moderating.

:   Influence the relationship between independent and dependent
    variables.

Mediating.

:   Are explained by independent variables while also explain dependent
    variables.

Control.

:   Variables that are not pertinent to explaining a dependent variable
    so must be controlled.

To understand the differences between these different variable types,
consider the example shown in the following figure.

If the researcher believes that intelligence influences students’
academic achievement, then a measure of intelligence, such as an IQ
score, would be the independent variable while a measure of academic
success, grade point average, would be the dependent variable. If it is
father believed that the effect of intelligence on academic achievement
is also dependent on the students’ effort then “effort” becomes a
moderating variable. Incidentally, it would be reasonable to also view
effort as the independent variable and intelligence as a moderating
variable.

#### Attributes of a Good Theory

Theories are simplified and often partial explanations of complex social
reality. As such, there can be good explanations or poor explanations,
and consequently, there can be good theories or poor theories. How can
we evaluate the “goodness” of a given theory? Different criteria have
been proposed by different researchers, the more important of which are
listed below:

-   : Are the theoretical constructs, propositions, boundary conditions,
    and assumptions logically consistent with each other? If some of
    these “building blocks” of a theory are inconsistent with each other
    (e.g., a theory assumes rationality, but some constructs represent
    non-rational concepts), then the theory is a poor theory.

-   : How much does a given theory explain (or predict) reality? Good
    theories obviously explain the target phenomenon better than rival
    theories, as often measured by variance explained (R-square) value
    in regression equations.

-   : British philosopher Karl Popper stated in the 1940’s that for
    theories to be valid, they must be falsifiable. Falsifiability
    ensures that the theory is potentially disprovable, if empirical
    data does not match with theoretical propositions, which allows for
    their empirical testing by researchers. In other words, theories
    cannot be theories unless they can be empirically testable.
    Tautological statements, such as “a day with high temperatures is a
    hot day” are not empirically testable because a hot day is defined
    (and measured) as a day with high temperatures, and hence, such
    statements cannot be viewed as a theoretical proposition.
    Falsifiability requires presence of rival explanations it ensures
    that the constructs are adequately measurable, and so forth.
    However, note that saying that a theory is falsifiable is not the
    same as saying that a theory should be falsified. If a theory is
    indeed falsified based on empirical evidence, then it was probably a
    poor theory to begin with!

-   : Parsimony examines how much of a phenomenon is explained with how
    few variables. The concept is attributed to 14th century English
    logician Father William of Ockham (and hence called “Ockham’s razor”
    or “Occam’s razor”), which states that among competing explanations
    that sufficiently explain the observed evidence, the simplest theory
    (i.e., one that uses the smallest number of variables or makes the
    fewest assumptions) is the best. Explanation of a complex social
    phenomenon can always be increased by adding more and more
    constructs. However, such approach defeats the purpose of having a
    theory, which are intended to be “simplified” and generalizable
    explanations of reality. Parsimony relates to the degrees of freedom
    in a given theory. Parsimonious theories have higher degrees of
    freedom, which allow them to be more easily generalized to other
    contexts, settings, and populations.

#### Approaches to Theorizing

How do researchers build theories? Steinfeld and
Fulk[@steinfield1990theory] recommend four approaches. The first
approach is to build theories inductively based on observed patterns of
events or behaviors. Such approach is often called because the theory is
grounded in empirical observations. This technique is heavily dependent
on the observational and interpretive abilities of the researcher, and
the resulting theory may be subjective and non-confirmable. Furthermore,
observing certain patterns of events will not necessarily make a theory,
unless the researcher is able to provide consistent explanations for the
observed patterns.

The second approach to theory building is to conduct a bottom-up
conceptual analysis to identify different sets of predictors relevant to
the phenomenon of interest using a predefined framework. One such
framework may be a simple input-process-output framework, where the
researcher may look for different categories of inputs, such as
individual, organizational, and/or technological factors potentially
related to the phenomenon of interest (the output), and describe the
underlying processes that link these factors to the target phenomenon.
This is also an inductive approach that relies heavily on the inductive
abilities of the researcher, and interpretation may be biased by
researcher’s prior knowledge of the phenomenon being studied.

The third approach to theorizing is to extend or modify existing
theories to explain a new context, such as by extending theories of
individual learning to explain organizational learning. While making
such an extension, certain concepts, propositions, and/or boundary
conditions of the old theory may be retained and others modified to fit
the new context. This deductive approach leverages the rich inventory of
social science theories developed by prior theoreticians, and is an
efficient way of building new theories by building on existing ones.

The fourth approach is to apply existing theories in entirely new
contexts by drawing upon the structural similarities between the two
contexts. This approach relies on reasoning by analogy, and is probably
the most creative way of theorizing using a deductive approach. For
instance, Markus[@markus1987toward] used analogical similarities between
a nuclear explosion and uncontrolled growth of networks or network-based
businesses to propose a critical mass theory of network growth. Just as
a nuclear explosion requires a critical mass of radioactive material to
sustain a nuclear explosion, Markus suggested that a network requires a
critical mass of users to sustain its growth, and without such critical
mass, users may leave the network, causing an eventual demise of the
network.

Propositions, Hypothesis, and Models
------------------------------------

In seeking explanations to an observed phenomenon it is not adequate
just to identify key constructs underlying that phenomenon, it is
important to also state the patterns of the relationships between
constructs. Such patterns of relationships are called propositions. A
proposition, thus, is a conjectural relationship between constructs that
is stated in a declarative form. An example of a proposition is: “An
increase in student intelligence leads to an increase in academic
achievement.” A proposition does not need to be true but it must be
testable so its truth can be determined. Propositions are generally
derived from either logic (deduction) or observation (induction).

Because propositions are associations between abstract constructs, they
cannot be tested directly. Instead, they are tested indirectly by
examining the relationship between the corresponding measures
(variables) of those constructs. The formulation of a proposition is
called a . Since IQ scores and grade point average are operational
measures of intelligence and academic achievement respectively, the
proposition stated above can be specified in form of a hypothesis: “An
increase in students’ IQ score leads to an increase in their grade point
average.” Propositions are generated from theory while hypotheses are
generated from empirical evidence. Hence, hypotheses are testable using
observed data and may be rejected if the data do not support them.

Hypotheses are said to be either strong or weak. “Students’ IQ scores
are related to their academic achievement” is an example of a weak
hypothesis since it indicates neither the directionality of the
hypothesis (i.e., whether the relationship is positive or negative) nor
its causality (i.e., whether intelligence causes academic achievement or
academic achievement causes intelligence). A stronger hypothesis is
“students’ IQ scores are positively related to their academic
achievement,” which indicates the directionality but not the causality.
A still better hypothesis is “students’ IQ scores have positive effects
on their academic achievement,” which specifies both the directionality
and the causality (i.e., intelligence causes academic achievement, and
not the reverse).

Also note that hypotheses should clearly specify independent and
dependent variables. In the hypothesis, “students’ IQ scores have
positive effects on their academic achievement,” it is clear that
intelligence is the independent variable (the “cause”) and academic
achievement is the dependent variable (the “effect”). Further, it is
also clear that this hypothesis can be evaluated as either true (if
higher intelligence leads to higher academic achievement) or false (if
higher intelligence has no effect on or leads to lower academic
achievement). Statements such as “students are generally intelligent” or
“all students can achieve academic success” are not hypotheses because
they do not specify independent and dependent variables nor do they
specify a directional relationship that can be evaluated as true or
false.

### Theories and Models

A term often used in conjunction with theory is . A model is a
representation of all or part of a system that is constructed to study
that system (e.g., how the system works or what triggers the system).
While a theory tries to explain a phenomenon, a model tries to represent
a phenomenon in an understandable way. Models are often used to make
important decisions that are based on a given set of inputs. For
instance, marketing managers may use models to decide how much money to
spend on advertising for different product lines based on parameters
such as prior year’s advertising expenses, sales, market growth, and
competing products. Likewise, weather forecasters use models to predict
future weather patterns based on parameters such as wind speeds, wind
direction, temperature, and humidity. While these models are useful,
they do not explain the theory behind advertising budgets or weather
forecasting.

Models may be of different kinds, such as mathematical models, network
models, and path models. Models can also be descriptive, predictive, or
normative. Descriptive models are frequently used for representing
complex systems, for visualizing variables and relationships in such
systems. Predictive models (e.g., a regression model) allow forecast of
future events. Normative models are used to guide activities along
commonly accepted norms or practices. Models may also be static if it
represents the state of a system at one point in time or dynamic if it
represents a system’s evolution over time.

The process of theory or model development may involve both inductive
and deductive reasoning, as described in Chapter 1, as shown in the
following figure. Induction occurs when we observe a fact and ask, “Why
is this happening?” while deduction occurs when we have a theory and
ask, “Is this supported by observable facts?” Both induction and
deduction leads to preliminary conclusions that are then tested in order
to develop a final model of the phenomenon. Researchers must be able to
move back and forth between inductive and deductive reasoning if they
are to post extensions or modifications to a given model or theory, or
built better ones, which are the essence of scientific research.

Inductive or Deductive Approaches
---------------------------------

Theories are used to structure research at the same time that the
research structures theory. The reciprocal relationship between theory
and research becomes more evident to researchers as they determine
whether an inductive or deductive approach is best. Often, researchers
find that a single approach is not ideal and projects iterate over many
cycles of inductive/deductive approaches. It is common for a researcher
to start with an approach and postulate a new theory then switch to a
approach to test that theory. Later the researcher may return to an
inductive approach to expand and refine the theory, followed by another
round of deductive methods to test the new theory.

### Inductive Research

In inductive research, a researcher begins by collecting data that are
relevant to the topic of interest. Once a substantial amount of data
have been collected, the researcher will start to look for trends or
correlations and then develop the theory that explains those patterns.
Thus, an inductive approach moves from data to theory, or from specific
instances to general explanations and is often referred to as a
“bottom-up” approach. Figure \[02.fig02\] broadly outlines the process
used with an inductive approach to research.

=\[rectangle,draw=cyan!90,fill=cyan!10,ultra thick, inner
sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=cyan!90,fill=cyan!25,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=cyan!90,fill=cyan!40,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=cyan!90,fill=cyan!55,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[red\]

(obs) [Observations]{}; (pat) \[above=0.5cm of obs,xshift=2.5cm\]
[Patterns]{}; (hyp) \[above=0.5cm of pat,xshift=2.5cm\] [Hypothesis]{};
(the) \[above=0.5cm of hyp,xshift=2.5cm\] [Theory]{};

(obs) to \[in=270\] (pat); (pat) to \[in=270\] (hyp); (hyp) to
\[in=270\] (the);

Inductive methods are commonly applied to qualitative research projects
and are frequently criticized for being too subjective. The goal is,
generally, to attempt to understand the dynamics of business practices
and use that understanding to draw general conclusions that may apply to
other businesses. The result of many qualitative research projects is
what is called [^3] where the researcher starts with no preconceived
notions and generates a new theory from the data analysis.

Following are three examples of inductive methods research.

-   Bansal, Pratima, and Roth[@bansal2000companies] conducted a study
    concerning why corporations “go green.” They collected data from 53
    firms in the United Kingdom and Japan and analyzed that data to
    formulate a theory.

-   Sharma[@sharma2000managerial] sent surveys to $ 3-5 $ senior
    managers of $ 110 $ Canadian oil and gas companies with annual sales
    in excess of $ \$20 $. The surveys were analyzed and the researcher
    concludes that managers of these companies must be influenced to
    embrace environmental issues as a corporate goal, but that must be
    done within the context of the corporate structure.

-   Sia and Gopa[@sia2009employees] used an inductive method to analyze
    effect on diversity of the “psychological contract” between a
    corporation and its employees. A psychological contract is described
    as what the employee “...believes he or she has agreed to...” rather
    than what is actually in the employment contract. They administered
    two different surveys to $ 207 $ managers of public sector units in
    Orrisa, India. They found that certain minority groups tended to
    “...protect each other when required, particularly during the time
    of crisis.” However, members of the dominant group did not engage in
    that type of behavior, leading to “...a feeling of
    non-inclusiveness.”

In addition to the research studies discussed above, several papers have
been published by various journals encouraging inductive research
methods, especially in analyzing case studies. For example, Eisenhardt
and Graebner[@eisenhardt2007theory] published an article in the *Academy
of Management Journal* that suggested a process for generating theory
from multiple case studies and encouraged management researchers to
consider the role of theory-generation in their case studies.

### Deductive Research

In deductive research, a researcher begins with a theory of interest and
then collects data to test that theory. Thus, a deductive approach moves
from a general explanation of some phenomenon to specific instances that
prove, or disprove, the phenomenon and is often referred to as a
“top-down” approach. Figure \[ch02.fig03\] broadly outlines the process
used with a deductive approach to research.

=\[rectangle,draw=purple!90,fill=purple!10,ultra thick, inner
sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=purple!90,fill=purple!25,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=purple!90,fill=purple!40,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[rectangle,draw=purple!90,fill=purple!55,ultra thick,
inner sep=10pt,minimum width=3.5cm,minimum height=1.5cm, rounded
corners=.25cm\] =\[red\]

(the) [Theory]{}; (hyp) \[below=0.5cm of the,xshift=2.5cm\]
[Hypothesis]{}; (obs) \[below=0.5cm of hyp,xshift=2.5cm\]
[Observations]{}; (con) \[below=0.5cm of obs,xshift=2.5cm\]
[Confirmation]{};

(the) to \[in=180\] (hyp); (hyp) to \[in=180\] (obs); (obs) to
\[in=180\] (con);

Deductive methods are commonly applied to quantitative research projects
and are often considered the “gold standard” of methods, especially
among researchers in the natural sciences. The goal is, generally, to
test existing theories to see if they are valid in cases that have not
been previously considered. Following are a few example studies that use
a deductive approach.

-   Parboteeah, Paik, and Cullen[@parboteeah2009religious] studied the
    influence of religion on the workplace. They used data from more
    then $ 44 $ thousand individuals in 39 countries to determine if
    Buddhism, Christianity, Hindusim, and Islam influenced both
    extrinsic and intrinsic work values. They found that the results
    “...generally support the posited hypotheses, confirming that
    religion is positively related to work values.” Because the study
    began with hypotheses and tested those hypotheses against gathered
    data this is a deductive methodology.

-   Hackman and Oldham[@hackman1976motivation] used existing theory to
    develop a model to predict the conditions that will motivate
    employees to perform effectively on their jobs. They tested $ 658 $
    employees who worked at $ 62 $ different jobs in seven organizations
    and found that the results support the validity of their model.

-   Delaney and Huselid[@delaney1996impact] investigated the
    relationship between human resource management and perceptions of
    organizational performance. They came up with two hypotheses and
    then gathered data to test those hypotheses. The result of their
    study is that positive human resources practices (like training
    programs) have a positive correlation with the perception of the
    organizational performance.

### Complementary Approaches

While inductive and deductive approaches to research seem quite
different, they are complementary in the sense that one approach creates
theories and the other tests theories. In some cases, researchers plan
for their research to include multiple phases, one inductive and the
other deductive. In other cases, a researcher might begin a study with
the plan to only conduct either inductive or deductive research but then
discover that the other approach is needed to develop a full picture.

One such example is a research project completed by Lawrence Sherman and
Richard Berk[@sherman1984specific]. They conducted an experiment to test
two competing theories of the effects of punishment on deterring
domestic violence. Specifically, Sherman and Berk hypothesized that
deterrence theory would provide a better explanation of the effects of
arresting accused batterers than labeling theory. Deterrence theory
predicts that arresting an accused spouse batterer will reduce future
incidents of violence while labeling theory predicts that arresting
accused spouse batterers will increase future incidents.

Sherman and Berk found, after conducting an experiment with the help of
local police in one city, that arrest did in fact deter future incidents
of violence, thus supporting their hypothesis that deterrence theory
would better predict the effect of arrest. After conducting this
research, they and other researchers went on to conduct similar
experiments in six additional cities but the results from these
follow-up studies were mixed. In some cases, arrest deterred future
incidents of violence but in other cases, it did not. This left the
researchers with new data that they needed to explain. The researchers
next took an inductive approach in an effort to make sense of their
latest empirical observations. The new studies revealed that arrest
seemed to have a deterrent effect for those who were married and
employed but that it led to increased offenses for those who were
unmarried and unemployed. In the end, the researchers turned to control
theory and predicted that having some stake in conformity through the
social ties provided by marriage and employment would deter future
violence. This research project is a good example of one that evolves
through several iterations of induction/deduction.

Qualitative vs. Quantitative Data
---------------------------------

In Chapter 1, the differences between qualitative and quantitative
research methods was discussed. This is revisited here because this
distinction is relevant to how researchers design their projects.

Summary
-------

Theories, paradigms, levels of analysis, and the order in which one
proceeds in the research process all play an important role in shaping
what we ask about the business, how we ask it, and in some cases, even
what we are likely to find. A microlevel study of employment practices
will look much different than a macrolevel study. A researcher’s
theoretical perspective will also shape a study. In particular, the
theory invoked will likely shape not only the way a question about a
topic is asked but also which topic gets investigated in the first
place.

This does not mean that business research is biased or corrupt. One of
the main preoccupations of researchers is to recognize and address the
biases that creep into the research process. It is human nature to
prefer a particular approach to a research project but understanding the
strengths and weaknesses of that approach is crucial for not only
successfully completing a research-based investigation but also for
intelligently reading and understanding research reports.

[^1]: Positivism was also discussed as one of the main branches of
    epistemology but since it is so common in the research community it
    is also recognized as a paradigm.

[^2]: Deductive and inductive logic methods are discussed later in this
    chapter.

[^3]: Grounded theory was first discussed by Glaser and Strauss in the
    late $ 1960 $’s but has been discussed in many journal articles and
    books. See, for example, Strauss, Anselm, and Juliet
    Corbin[@strauss1994grounded].
