Interviews {#ch10:interviews}
==========

What Is Interview Research?
---------------------------

[r]{}[0.4]{} ![image](gfx/09-men){width="40.00000%"}

Today’s young men are delaying their entry into adulthood. That’s a nice
way of saying they are “totally confused;” “cannot commit to their
relationships, work, or lives;” and are “obsessed with never wanting to
grow up.”[^1] But don’t take my word for it. Take sociologist Michael
Kimmel’s word. He interviewed $ 400 $ young men, ages $ 16 $ to $ 26 $,
over the course of four years across the United States to learn how they
made the transition from adolescence into adulthood. Since the results
of Kimmel’s research were published in $ 2008 $ [@kimmel2008perilous]
his work has made quite a splash. Featured in news reports, on blogs,
and in many book reviews, some claim Kimmel’s research “could save the
humanity of many young men.” Whatever is correct about Kimmel’s
research, one thing remains true: We surely would not know nearly as
much as we now do about the lives of many young American men were it not
for interview research.[^2]

Knowing how to create and conduct a good interview is an essential skill
for researchers, especially those interested in . Interviews are used by
market researchers to learn how to sell their products, journalists use
interviews to get information from a whole host of people from VIPs to
random people on the street. Television interviewers help viewers get to
know guests on their shows, employers use them to make decisions about
job offers, and even radio hosts interview call-in participants. It
seems everyone who’s anyone knows how to conduct an interview.

From the business perspective, interviews are a method of data
collection that involves two or more people exchanging information
through a series of questions and answers. The questions are designed by
a researcher to elicit information from interview participant(s) on a
specific topic or set of topics. Typically interviews involve an
in-person meeting between two people, an interviewer and an interviewee.
But interviews need not be limited to two people nor must they occur in
person.

Interviews are an excellent way to gather detailed information. They
also have an advantage over surveys; with a survey, if a participant’s
response sparks some follow-up question, researchers generally do not
have an opportunity to ask for more information. What they get is what
they get. In an interview, however, because researchers are actually
talking with the study participants in real time, they can ask follow-up
questions and help clarify the responses. Thus, interviews are a useful
method to find out the “story” behind the responses in a written survey.

Interviews are also useful when the research topic is rather complex,
when the question being asked requires explanation, or when the answers
to the questions may not be immediately clear to participants who may
need some time in order to work through their responses. Also, if the
research topic is one about which people will likely have a lot to say
or will want to provide some explanation or describe some process,
interviews may be the best method.

In sum, interview research is especially useful when the following are
true:

1.  very detailed information is requested

2.  it is anticipated that respondents will need to be asked for more
    information about their responses

3.  the questions require lengthy explanation

4.  the topic is complex or may be confusing to respondents

5.  the involves studying processes

### Role of Interviewer

The interviewer has a complex and multi-faceted role in the interview
process, which includes the following tasks:

-   **Prepare for the interview**. Since the interviewer is in the
    forefront of the data collection effort, the quality of data
    collected depends heavily on how well the interviewer is trained to
    do the job. The interviewer must be trained in the interview process
    and the survey method, and also be familiar with the purpose of the
    study, how responses will be stored and used, and sources of
    interviewer bias. Interviewers should also rehearse and time the
    interview prior to the formal study.

-   **Locate and enlist the cooperation of respondents**. Particularly
    in cases where the interview will take place in the participant’s
    home, the interviewer must locate the address and work around
    respondents’ schedule, sometimes at undesirable times such as
    weekends. They should also be like a salesperson, selling the idea
    of participating in the study.

-   **Motivate respondents**. Respondents often feed off the motivation
    of the interviewer. If the interviewer is disinterested or
    inattentive, respondents will not be motivated to provide useful or
    informative responses. The interviewer must demonstrate enthusiasm
    about the study, communicate the importance of the research to
    respondents, and be attentive to respondents’ needs throughout the
    interview.

-   **Clarify any confusion or concerns**. Interviewers must be able to
    think on their feet and address unanticipated concerns or objections
    raised by respondents. Additionally, they should ask probing
    questions as necessary even if such questions are not in the script.

-   **Observe quality of response**. The interviewer is in the best
    position to judge the quality of information collected, and may
    supplement verbal responses obtained by also recording personal
    observations of gestures and body language.

Qualitative Interview Techniques
--------------------------------

Qualitative interviews are sometimes called intensive or in-depth
interviews. These interviews are semistructured; researchers have a
particular topic for the interview, but questions are open ended and may
not be asked in exactly the same way or in exactly the same order to
each and every respondent. During in-depth interviews, the primary aim
is to hear from respondents about what they think is important and to
hear it in their own words. This section considers conducting
qualitative interviews, analyzing interview data, and the strengths and
weaknesses of this method.

### Conducting Qualitative Interviews

Qualitative interviews might feel more like a conversation than an
interview to respondents, but the researcher is in fact usually guiding
the conversation with the goal of gathering information from a
respondent. A key difference between qualitative and quantitative
interviewing is that qualitative interviews contain open-ended
questions. The meaning of this term is of course implied by its name,
which are questions that a researcher poses without answer options.
Open-ended questions are more demanding of participants than
closed-ended questions since they require participants to come up with
their own words, phrases, or sentences to respond.

In a qualitative interview, researchers usually use a guide, which is a
list of topics or questions to be covered during the interview. It is
called a “guide” because it is simply that—it is used to *guide* the
interview, but it is not set in stone. Think of an interview guide like
an agenda for the day, it contains all the goals to be accomplished that
day but it would not be the end of the world if something is skipped or
if the order is changed somewhat.

Interview guides outline issues that are important, but because
participants are asked to provide answers in their own words, and to
raise points that they believe are important, each interview is likely
to flow a little differently. While the opening question in an in-depth
interview may be the same across all interviews, from that point on what
the participant says will shape how the interview proceeds. Many
researchers believe that this free flow of topics makes in-depth
interviewing exciting. It is also what makes in-depth interviewing
rather challenging to conduct. It takes a skilled interviewer to be able
to ask questions; actually listen to respondents; and pick up on cues
about when to follow up, when to move on, and when to simply let the
participant speak without guidance or interruption.

Interview guides tend to list topics or even specific questions, but the
format of an interview guide might depend on the researcher’s style,
experience, and comfort level as an interviewer or with the topic. For
example, in interviews of young people about their experiences with
workplace sexual harassment, the guide may be topic based with few
specific questions contained in the guide. Instead, it could contain
only an outline of topics that are important for the research, listed in
an order that it might make sense to cover them, noted on a sheet of
paper.

Of course, interview guides do not appear out of thin air. They are the
result of thoughtful and careful work on the part of a researcher. The
topics and questions are organized thematically and in the order in
which they are likely to proceed, though the flow of a qualitative
interview is in part determined by what a respondent has to say.
Sometimes qualitative interviewers may create two versions of the
interview guide: one version contains a very brief outline of the
interview, perhaps with just topic headings, and another version
contains detailed questions underneath each topic heading. In this case,
the researcher might use the very detailed guide to prepare and practice
in advance of actually conducting interviews and then just bring the
brief outline to the interview. Bringing an outline, as opposed to a
very long list of detailed questions, to an interview encourages the
researcher to actually listen to what a participant is saying. An overly
detailed interview guide will be difficult to navigate through during an
interview and could give respondents the misimpression that the
interviewer is more interested in the questions than in the
participant’s answers.

Brainstorming is a good first step in constructing an interview guide.
There are no rules at the brainstorming stage—simply list all the topics
and questions that come to mind when thinking about the research
question. Once a good list is created, it can be pared down by cutting
questions and topics that seem redundant and grouping like questions and
topics together. It is at this point that headings for grouped
categories are developed. Another important avenue of approach is to
consult scholarly literature to find out what kinds of questions other
interviewers have asked in similar studies. As with quantitative survey
research, it is best not to place very sensitive or potentially
controversial questions at the very beginning of the qualitative
interview guide. Participants need the opportunity to warm up to the
interview and to feel comfortable talking with the interviewer. Finally,
it is important to get feedback on the interview guide as it is being
developed. Researchers should ask peers for guidance and suggestions
once they come up with what they think is a pretty strong guide. Chances
are that peer reviewers will find ways to improve the guide.

There are a few guidelines worth noting about the specific questions in
the guide.

-   Avoid questions that can be answered with a simple yes or no.

-   If yes/no questions must be asked, include follow-up questions. One
    of the benefits of qualitative interviews is that participants can
    be asked for more information.

-   While follow-up questions are appropriate, “why” should be avoided
    since this particular question can be construed as confrontational.
    Instead of “why,” something like, “Could you tell me a little more
    about that?” is a good option.

-   Leading questions should be avoided. For example, rather than
    asking, “Don’t you agree that people who spend money frivolously are
    selfish?” ask “What comes to mind when you hear that someone has
    spent money frivolously?”

-   Keep most, if not all, questions open ended. The key to a successful
    qualitative interview is giving participants the opportunity to
    share information in their own words and in their own way.

After the interview guide is constructed, the interviewer is still not
ready to begin conducting interviews. The researcher next has to decide
how to collect and maintain the information that is provided by
participants.

It is probably most common for qualitative interviewers to take audio
recordings of the interviews they conduct. Recording interviews allows
researchers to focus on their interaction with the interview participant
rather than being distracted by trying to take notes. Of course, not all
participants will feel comfortable being recorded and sometimes even the
interviewer may feel that the subject is so sensitive that recording
would be inappropriate. If this is the case, it is up to the researcher
to balance note-taking with listening.

Practicing the interview in advance is crucial. Ideally, researchers
should interview one or two peers, or even friends, who are willing to
participate in trial runs. Even better are a few people who are similar
in at least some ways to the sample. The trial runs can provide feedback
on the questions and the demeanor of the interviewer.

### Analysis of Qualitative Interview Data

Analysis of qualitative interview data typically begins with a set of
transcripts of the interviews. Ideally, researchers who recorded the
interview can have the recordings transcribed so a written verbatim
record is available. Interviewers who relied on notes taken during the
interview should write a full version of the notes as quickly as
possible after the interview while the session is still fresh in mind.
It is usually helpful to also note non-verbal items such as body
language, tone of voice, or unusually long pauses before an answer.

While third party transcribers are easily found, it may be best for the
interviewer to transcribe the recordings personally. Often, things can
be recalled and noted about nonverbal behaviors and interactions that
may be relevant to analysis but that could not be picked up by the audio
recording alone. For example, interviewees may roll their eyes, wipe
tears from their face, and even make obscene gestures that speak volumes
about their feelings but would have been lost if the interviewer had not
transcribed the recording personally.

The goal of analysis is to reach some inferences, lessons, or
conclusions by condensing large amounts of data into relatively smaller,
more manageable bits of understandable information. Analysis of
qualitative interview data is normally and moves from the specific
observations an interviewer collects to identifying patterns across
those observations. Qualitative interviewers typically begin by reading
through transcripts of their interviews and identifying codes, which is
a shorthand representation of some complex set of issues or ideas. This
phase of the research is often referred to as coding and it involves
reading and rereading (and rereading again) interview transcripts until
the researcher has a clear idea about what sorts of themes come up
across the interviews.

Qualitative researcher and textbook author Kristin Esterberg
[@esterberg2002qualitative] describes coding as a multistage process.
She suggests that there are two types of coding: open coding and focused
coding. To analyze qualitative interview data, researchers can begin by
open coding transcripts. They read through each transcript, line by
line, and make a note of whatever categories or themes emerge. At this
stage, it is important that they not let the original research question
or expectations about what they think they may find cloud their ability
to see new categories or themes. This is called open coding for a
reason, they must keep an open mind. Open coding usually requires
multiple go-rounds. As they read through the transcripts, they begin to
see commonalities across the categories or themes. Then, they can begin
focused coding.

Focused coding involves collapsing or narrowing themes and categories
identified in open coding by reading through the notes made while
conducting open coding. Researchers identify themes or categories that
seem to be related, perhaps merging some or redefining others. Then they
give each theme or category a name or code. Then, they identify passages
of data that represent the emerging codes by reading through the
transcripts yet again (and probably again). They also might write up
brief definitions or descriptions of each code to making meaning of the
data and develop a way to talk about the findings.

As tedious and laborious as it might seem to read through hundreds of
pages of transcripts multiple times, sometimes getting started with the
coding process is actually the hardest part. In their text on analyzing
qualitative data, Lofland and Lofland [@lofland1995analytic] identify a
set of questions that may be useful when coding qualitative data.

1.  Of what topic, unit, or aspect is this an instance?

2.  What question about a topic does this item of data suggest?

3.  What sort of answer to a question about a topic does this item of
    data suggest (i.e., what proposition is suggested)?

Qualitative data can be analyzed with tools like *NVivo*, *RQDA*, and
*Coding Analysis Toolkit*[^3]. *NVivo* is very powerful but expensive.
*RQDA* is an *R* package that is useful for qualitative data analysis.
Since it is part of the *R* system it could be easily used in a mixed
methods project where *R* is used for quantitative and *RQDA* is used
for qualitative analysis. *Coding Analysis Toolkit* is a free online
text analysis service. These programs are specifically designed to
assist qualitative researchers with organizing, managing, sorting, and
analyzing large amounts of qualitative data. The programs work by
allowing researchers to import interview transcripts and then label or
code passages, cut and paste passages, search for various words or
phrases, and organize complex interrelationships among passages and
codes.

As an example, the following excerpt, from a paper analyzing the
electronic gaming industry in two jurisdictions, [@buchanan2010efficacy]
summarizes how the process of analyzing qualitative interview data often
works.

> Data were collected through these combined methods, and while analysis
> was undertaken using NVivo, the analysis was guided by these methods.
> Thirty-eight in-depth interviews were undertaken with gaming operators
> and gaming machine manufacturers in both the Nevada (USA) and NSW
> (Australian) jurisdictions during $ 2005-2006 $. Interview data were
> augmented through observation, resulting in a rich collection of data.
> The data were coded and initially entered into ‘nodes’ within the
> NVivo program. A pre-defined set of themes was derived from topic
> areas of the interviews. Each theme then became a node. As each
> interview was read, additional themes were identified and nodes
> created for each theme. The nodes were fleshed out as data were
> extracted from each interview referring to the same theme. Thus a
> range of themes was created as a result of going through the data and
> coding according to themes within each transcript. Once all data had
> been placed into various nodes, themes were checked through the matrix
> function within NVivo to ensure that the various themes were distinct
> from each other and that there was no redundancy.
>
> Further analysis of emerging themes resulted in a conceptual model…

### Strengths and Weaknesses of Qualitative Interviews

As the preceding sections have suggested, qualitative interviews are an
excellent way to gather detailed information. Whatever topic is of
interest to researchers employing this method can be explored in much
more depth than with almost any other method. Not only are participants
given the opportunity to elaborate in a way that is not possible with
other methods like survey research, but they also are able share
information with researchers in their own words and from their own
perspectives rather than being asked to fit those perspectives into
limited response options provided by the researcher. Because qualitative
interviews are designed to elicit detailed information, they are
especially useful when a researcher’s aim is to study processes, or the
“how” of various phenomena. Yet another, and sometimes overlooked,
benefit of qualitative interviews that it occurs in person so
researchers can make observations beyond those that a respondent is
orally reporting. A respondent’s body language, and even her or his
choice of time and location for the interview, might provide a
researcher useful data.

Of course, all these benefits do not come without some drawbacks. As
with quantitative survey research, qualitative interviews rely on
respondents’ ability to accurately and honestly recall whatever details
about their lives, circumstances, thoughts, opinions, or behaviors are
being asked about. Further, qualitative interviewing is time intensive
and can be quite expensive. Creating an interview guide, identifying a
sample, and conducting interviews are just the beginning. Transcribing
interviews is labor intensive—and that’s before coding even begins. It
is also not uncommon to offer respondents some monetary incentive or
thank-you for participating since researchers are asking for more of the
participants’ time than if they had simply mailed them a questionnaire.
Conducting qualitative interviews is not only labor intensive but also
potentially emotionally taxing. It may be that the researcher will hear
stories that are shocking, infuriating, and sad. Researchers embarking
on a qualitative interview project should keep in mind their own
abilities to hear stories that may be difficult to hear.

Quantitative Interview Techniques
---------------------------------

Quantitative interviews are similar to qualitative interviews in that
they involve some researcher/respondent interaction. But the process of
conducting and analyzing findings from quantitative interviews differs
in several ways from that of qualitative interviews. Each approach also
comes with its own unique set of strengths and weaknesses.

### Conducting Quantitative Interviews

Much of what was covered earlier in this chapter and in Chapter
\[08:surveys\], page , applies to quantitative interviews as well. In
fact, quantitative interviews are sometimes referred to as survey
interviews because they resemble survey-style question-and-answer
formats. The difference between quantitiative interviews and surveys is
that in an interview questions and answer options are read to
respondents rather than having respondents complete a questionnaire on
their own. As with questionnaires, the questions posed in a standardized
interview tend to be closed ended. There are instances in which a
quantitative interviewer might pose a few open-ended questions as well.
In these cases, the coding process works somewhat differently than
coding in-depth interview data.

In quantitative interviews, an interview schedule is used to guide
researchers as they pose questions and answer options to respondents. An
interview schedule is usually more rigid than an interview guide. It
contains the list of questions and answer options that the researcher
will read to respondents. Whereas qualitative researchers emphasize
respondents’ roles in helping to determine how an interview progresses,
in a quantitative interview, consistency in the way that questions and
answer options are presented is very important. The aim is to pose every
question-and-answer option in the very same way to every respondent.
This is done to minimize interviewer effect, or possible changes in the
way an interviewee responds based on how or when questions and answer
options are presented by the interviewer.

Quantitative interviews may be recorded, but because questions tend to
be closed ended, taking notes during the interview is less disruptive
than it can be during a qualitative interview. If a quantitative
interview contains open-ended questions, however, recording the
interview is advised. It may also be helpful to record quantitative
interviews if a researcher wishes to assess possible interview effect.
Noticeable differences in responses might be more attributable to
interviewer effect than to any real respondent differences. Having a
recording of the interview can help researchers make such
determinations.

Quantitative interviewers are usually more concerned with gathering data
from a large, representative sample but collecting data from many people
via interviews can be quite laborious. Technological advances in
telephone interviewing procedures can assist quantitative interviewers
in this process. However, one concern about telephone interviewing is
that fewer and fewer people list their telephone numbers these days, but
Random Digit Dialing (*RDD*) takes care of this problem. *RDD* programs
dial randomly generated phone numbers for researchers conducting phone
interviews. This means that unlisted numbers are as likely to be
included in a sample as listed numbers (though folks with unlisted
numbers are not usually very pleased to receive calls from unknown
researchers). Computer-assisted telephone interviewing (*CATI*) programs
have also been developed to assist quantitative survey researchers.
These programs allow an interviewer to enter responses directly into a
computer as they are provided, thus saving hours of time that would
otherwise have to be spent entering data into an analysis program by
hand.

Conducting quantitative interviews over the phone does not come without
some drawbacks. Responses to sensitive questions or those that
respondents view as invasive are generally less accurate when data are
collected over the phone as compared to when they are collected in
person. Also, due to the pervasive increase in “push polling” for
election campaigns, many respondents are unwilling to speak to a
researcher on the phone.

### Analysis of Quantitative Interview Data

As with the analysis of survey data, analysis of quantitative interview
data usually involves coding response options numerically, entering
numeric responses into a data analysis computer program, and then
running various statistical commands to identify patterns across
responses. Chapter \[08:surveys\], Section \[08:analysisOfSurveyData\],
, page , describes the coding process for quantitative data. But what
happens when quantitative interviews ask open-ended questions? In this
case, responses are typically numerically coded, just as closed-ended
questions are, but the process is a little more complex than simply
giving a “no” a label of $ 0 $ and a “yes” a label of $ 1 $.

In some cases, quantitatively coding open-ended interview questions may
work inductively. If this is the case, rather than ending with codes,
descriptions of codes, and interview excerpts, the researcher will
assign a numerical value to codes and may not utilize verbatim excerpts
from interviews in later reports of results. Keep in mind that with
quantitative methods the aim is to be able to represent and condense
data into numbers. The quantitative coding of open-ended interview
questions is often a deductive process. The researcher may begin with an
idea about likely responses to his or her open-ended questions and
assign a numerical value to each likely response. Then the researcher
will review participants’ open-ended responses and assign the numerical
value that most closely matches the value of his or her expected
response.

### Strengths and Weaknesses of Quantitative Interviews

Quantitative interviews offer several benefits. The strengths and
weakness of quantitative interviews tend to be couched in comparison to
those of administering hard copy questionnaires. For example, response
rates tend to be higher with interviews than with mailed questionnaires.
That makes sense—most people find it easier to say “no” to a piece of
paper than to a person. Quantitative interviews can also help reduce
respondent confusion. If a respondent is unsure about the meaning of a
question or answer option on a questionnaire, he or she probably will
not have the opportunity to get clarification from the researcher. An
interview, on the other hand, gives the researcher an opportunity to
clarify or explain any items that may be confusing.

As with every method of data collection, there are also drawbacks to
conducting quantitative interviews. Perhaps the largest, and of most
concern to quantitative researchers, is interviewer effect. While
questions on hard copy questionnaires may create an impression based on
the way they are presented, having a person administer questions
introduces a slew of additional variables that might influence a
respondent. Consistency is key with quantitative data collection—and
human beings are not necessarily known for their consistency.
Interviewing respondents is also much more time consuming and expensive
than mailing questionnaires. Thus quantitative researchers may opt for
written questionnaires over interviews on the grounds that they will be
able to reach a large sample at a much lower cost than were they to
interact personally with each and every respondent.

Issues to Consider
------------------

While quantitative interviews resemble survey research in their
question/answer formats, they share with qualitative interviews the
characteristic that researchers actually interact with their subjects.
The fact that researchers interacts with their subjects creates a few
complexities that deserve attention.

### Power

First and foremost, interviewers must be aware of and attentive to the
power differential between themselves and interview participants. The
interviewer sets the agenda and leads the conversation. While
qualitative interviewers aim to allow participants to have some control
over which or to what extent various topics are discussed, at the end of
the day it is the researcher who is in charge (at least that is how most
respondents will perceive the dynamic). Researcher are asking people to
reveal things about themselves they may not typically share with others.
Moreover, researchers are generally not reciprocating by revealing much
or anything about themselves. All these factors shape the power dynamics
of an interview.

A number of excellent pieces have been written dealing with issues of
power in research and data collection. Anyan [@anyan2013influence]
offered several suggestions for overcoming the power imbalance between
researchers and participants during the data gathering phase, including
the “…interviewer must court the interviewee, enhance the sense of
rapport between them and build a sympathetic relationship and a sense of
mutual trust in the research interview.” During data analysis,
researchers may want to consider letting interviewees interpret what
they meant during the interview. “The willingness to share the data
analysis process with the interviewee or letting them join the final
stages of writing is in the hands of the interviewer.” However,
researchers must be vigilant to not let the interviewee shape the
outcome of the research project, researchers have an ethical obligation
to maintain standards that the average interviewee would not understand.

Another easy way to balance the power differential between researchers
and interview participants is to make the intent of the research project
very clear. Sharing the rationale for conducting the research and the
research question(s) that frame the project may help keep a proper
balance of power. Participants should also understand how the data will
be stored and used; and how their privacy will be protected. Many of
these details are stipulated by the oversight group’s procedures and
requirements; but even if they are not, researchers should be attentive
to how sharing information with participants can help balance the power
differences between themselves and those who participate in the research
project.

There are no easy answers when it comes to handling the power
differential between the researcher and participants, and even
professional researchers do not agree on the best approach for doing so.
It is nevertheless an issue to be attentive to when conducting any form
of research, particularly those that involve interpersonal interactions
and relationships with research participants.

### Location

One way to balance the power between researcher and respondent is to
conduct the interview in a location of the participants’ choosing, where
they will feel most comfortable answering questions. Interviews can take
place in any number of locations—in respondents’ homes or offices,
researchers’ homes or offices, coffee shops, restaurants, public parks,
or hotel lobbies, to name just a few possibilities. Each location comes
with its own set of benefits and its own challenges. It may be best to
allow the participant to choose the location that is most convenient and
most comfortable, identifying a location where there will be few
distractions is also important. For example, some coffee shops and
restaurants are so loud that recording the interview can be a challenge.
Other locations may present different sorts of distractions. For
example, it may be that parents, out of necessity, will spend more time
attending to their children during an interview than responding to
questions. Interviewers should be prepared to suggest a few possible
locations, and note the goal of avoiding distractions, when asking
participants to choose a location.

Of course, the extent to which a respondent should be given complete
control over choosing a location must also be balanced by accessibility
of the location to the interviewer, and by the safety and comfort level
of the location. It is conceivable, for example, that a participant’s
home could be decorated wall to wall with posters representing various
white power organizations displaying a variety of violently racist
messages. Even if the topic of the interview has nothing to do with home
decor, the discomfort and fear the interviewer could feel during the
interview could easily distracted from the task at hand. While it is
important to conduct interviews in a location that is comfortable for
respondents, doing so should never come at the expense of the
interviewer’s welfare or safety.

### Researcher-Respondent Relationship

Finally, a unique feature of interviews is that they require social
interaction, which means that to at least some extent, a relationship is
formed between interviewer and interviewee. While there may be some
differences in how the researcher-respondent relationship works
depending on whether the interviews are qualitative or quantitative, one
essential relationship element is the same: R-E-S-P-E-C-T. A good
rapport between the interviewer and the participant is crucial to
successful interviewing. Rapport is the sense of connection established
between the interviewer and participant. Some argue that this term is
too clinical and perhaps it implies that a researcher tricks a
participant into thinking they are socially closer than they really are.
While it is unfortunately true that some researchers might believe this
implication, that is not the sense for rapport that researchers should
attempt to establish with their subjects. Instead, as already mentioned,
the key is *respect*.

There are no big secrets or tricks for how to show respect for research
participants. At its core, the interview interaction should not differ
from any other social interaction in which interviewers show gratitude
for a person’s time and respect for a person’s humanity. It is crucial
that interviewers conduct the interview in a way that is culturally
sensitive. In some cases, this might mean educating themselves about the
study population and even receiving some training to help them learn to
effectively communicate with the research participants. Interviewers
should not judge participants; they are there to listen. Participants
have been kind enough to give them their time and attention. Even if
interviewers disagree strongly with what a participant shares in an
interview, their job as researchers is to gather the information being
shared, not to make personal judgments about it.

Developing good rapport requires good listening. In fact, listening
during an interview is an active, not a passive, practice. Active
listening means that interviewers participate with the respondent by
showing that they understand and follow whatever it is that is being
shared. The questions asked to respondents should indicate that
interviewers actually heard what they have just said. Active listening
probably means that interviewers will probe the respondent for more
information from time to time throughout the interview. A probe is a
request for more information. Both qualitative and quantitative
interviewers probe respondents, though the way they probe usually
differs. In quantitative interviews, probing should be uniform. Often
quantitative interviewers will predetermine what sorts of probes they
will use. Interviewers should not to use probes that might appear to
agree or disagree with what respondents said. So “yes” or “I agree” or
even a questioning “hmmmm” should be avoided. Instead, responses like a
simple “thank you” to indicate that the response was heard is more
neutral. A “yes” or “no” response should be used if, and only if, a
respondent specifically asks us if they were heard or understood.

In some ways qualitative interviews better lend themselves to following
up with respondents and asking them to explain, describe, or otherwise
provide more information. This is because qualitative interviewing
techniques are designed to go with the flow and take whatever direction
the respondent goes during the interview. Nevertheless, it is worth the
interviewer’s time to come up with helpful probes in advance of an
interview even in the case of a qualitative interview. They do not want
to find themselves stumped or speechless after a respondent has just
said something about which needs to be probed further. This is another
reason that practicing an interview in advance with people who are
similar to those in the sample is a good idea.

Conducting the Interview
------------------------

Before the interview, interviewers should prepare a “kit” to carry to
the interview session, including a cover letter from the principal
investigator or sponsor, adequate copies of the survey instrument, photo
identification, and a telephone number for respondents to call to verify
the interviewer’s authenticity. The interviewer should set up an
appointment and then be on time. To start the interview, interviewers
should speak in an imperative and confident tone, such as “I’d like to
take a few minutes of your time to interview you for a very important
study,” instead of “May I come in to do an interview?” They should
introduce themselves, present personal credentials, explain the purpose
of the study in a few sentences, and assure confidentiality of
respondents’ comments, all in less than a minute. No big words or jargon
should be used, and no details should be provided unless specifically
requested. If interviewers wish to record the interview, they should ask
for respondent’s explicit permission before starting. Even if the
interview is recorded, the interview must take notes on key issues,
probes, or verbatim phrases.

During the interview, interviewers should follow the script and ask
questions exactly as written. They should also not change the order of
questions or skip any question that may have been answered earlier. Any
issues with the questions should be discussed during rehearsal prior to
the actual interview sessions. Interviewers should not finish the
respondent’s sentences. If the respondent gives a brief cursory answer,
the interviewer should probe the respondent to elicit a more thoughtful,
thorough response. Some useful probing techniques are:

-   **The silent probe**. Just pausing and waiting (without going into
    the next question) may suggest to respondents that the interviewer
    is waiting for more detailed response.

-   **Overt encouragement**. Occasional “uh-huh” or “okay” may encourage
    the respondent to go into greater details. However, the interviewer
    must not express approval or disapproval of what was said by the
    respondent.

-   **Ask for elaboration**. Such as “can you elaborate on that?” or “A
    minute ago, you were talking about an experience you had in high
    school. Can you tell me more about that?”

-   **Reflection**. Interviewers can try the psychotherapist’s trick of
    repeating what the respondent said. For instance, “What I’m hearing
    is that you found that experience very traumatic” and then pause and
    wait for the respondent to elaborate.

After the interview in completed, interviewers should thank respondents
for their time, tell them when to expect the results, and not leave
hastily. Immediately after leaving, they should write down any notes or
key observations that may help interpret the respondent’s comments
better.

Focus Groups
------------

Focus groups resemble qualitative interviews in that a researcher may
prepare an interview guide in advance and interact with participants by
asking them questions. But anyone who has conducted both one-on-one
interviews and focus groups knows that each is unique. In an interview,
usually one member (the research participant) is most active while the
other (the researcher) plays the role of listener, conversation guider,
and question asker. Focus groups, on the other hand, are planned
discussions designed to elicit group interaction and “collects data
through group interaction on a topic determined by the researcher.”
[@morgan1996focus] In this case, the researcher may play a less active
role than in a one-on-one interview. The researcher’s aim is to get
participants talking to each other and to observe interactions among
participants.

Focus groups are typically more dynamic than interviews. The researcher
takes the role of moderator, posing questions or topics for discussion,
but then lets the group members discuss the question or topic among
themselves. Participants may ask each other follow-up questions, agree
or disagree with one another, display body language that indicates
something about their feelings, or even come up with questions not
previously conceived of by the researcher. It is just these sorts of
interactions and displays that are of interest to the researcher. A
researcher conducting focus groups collects data on more than people’s
direct responses to her or his questions; the group interaction is a key
focal point. Due to the nature and unpredictability of group
interaction, and the fact that focus group researchers generally want to
draw out group interaction, focus groups tend to be qualitative rather
than quantitative.

There are numerous examples of marketing and business research using
focus group methodology.

In a $ 2009 $ study of the use of visual tobacco warnings,
Gallopel-Morvan . used focus groups and determined that the European
Union graphic warnings on cigarette packages was more effective than
text warnings. [@gallopel2011use] They used six focus group discussions
conducted in Rennes, Paris, and Brest with a total of $ 50 $ people
($ 26 $ smokers, $ 24 $ non-smokers, $ 25 $ women, $ 25 $ men).

An interesting study published by Wutich in $ 2009 $ compared the
results of a focus group with an open-ended self-administered
questionnaire among water decision makers in Phoenix, Arizona.
[@wutich2010comparing] She found that the focus group was no better than
the questionnaires when the questions were only moderately sensitive,
but the focus group was better “…for very sensitive topics when there
appeared to be an opportunity to exchange important information or solve
a pressing problem.”

In $ 2013 $, Sylvetsky published the results of a focus group study
where the effectiveness of advertising for the development of an obesity
awareness campaign aimed at young people. She conducted ten focus group
discussions in two regions of Georgia, United States. The groups of
children, aged $ 9 - 14 $, were led in discussions concerning healthy
food choice and lifestyles. They identified three themes: “My Mom wants
me to eat healthy foods like broccoli but it looks nasty and tastes
gross,” “Obesity is a problem but is does not apply to me,” and
“Everyone is made differently and it does not matter if you are fat.”

Government officials and political campaign workers use them to learn
how members of the public feel about a particular issue or candidate.
One of the earliest documented uses of focus groups comes from World War
II when researchers used them to assess the effectiveness of troop
training materials and of various propaganda efforts.
[@merton1946focused] Market researchers quickly adopted this method of
collecting data to learn about human beliefs and behaviors. Within
social science, the use of focus groups did not really take off until
the $ 1980 $s, when demographers and communication researchers began to
appreciate their use in understanding knowledge, attitudes, and
communication. Beyond various applied research projects, like those
mentioned above, social scientists also use focus groups in theory
development projects.

Focus groups share many of the strengths and weaknesses of one-on-one
qualitative interviews. Both methods can yield very detailed, in-depth
information; are excellent for studying social processes; and provide
researchers with an opportunity not only to hear what participants say
but also to observe what they do in terms of their body language. Focus
groups offer the added benefit of giving researchers a chance to collect
data on human interaction by observing how group participants respond
and react to one another. Like one-on-one qualitative interviews, focus
groups can also be quite expensive and time-consuming. However, there
may be some time savings with focus groups as it takes fewer group
events than one-on-one interviews to gather data from the same number of
people. Another potential drawback of focus groups, which is not a
concern for one-on-one interviews, is that one or two participants might
dominate the group, silencing other participants. Careful planning and
skillful moderation on the part of the researcher are crucial for
avoiding, or at least dealing with, such possibilities. The various
strengths and weaknesses of focus group research are summarized below.

-   Strengths of Focus Group Research

    -   Yield detailed, in-depth data

    -   Less time-consuming than one-on-one interviews

    -   Useful for studying social processes

    -   Allow researchers to observe body language in addition to
        self-reports

    -   Allow researchers to observe interaction between multiple
        participants

-   Weaknesses of Focus Group Research

    -   Expensive

    -   May be more time-consuming than survey research

    -   Minority of participants may dominate entire group

As mentioned, careful planning and skillful moderating are two crucial
considerations in the effective use of focus groups as a method of data
collection. In some ways, focus groups require more advance planning
than other qualitative methods of data collection such as one-on-one
interviews, where a researcher may be better able to control the setting
and the dialogue, or field research, where “going with the flow” and
observing events as they happen in their natural setting is the primary
aim and time is less limited. Researchers must take care to form focus
groups whose members will want to interact with one another and to
control the timing of the event so that participants are not asked nor
expected to stay for a longer time than they have agreed to participate.
The researcher should also be prepared to inform focus group
participants of their responsibility to maintain the confidentiality of
what is said in the group. But while the researcher can and should
encourage all focus group members to maintain confidentiality, she
should also clarify to participants that the unique nature of the group
setting prevents her from being able to promise that confidentiality
will be maintained.

Group size should be determined in part by the topic of the interview
and the researcher’s sense of the likelihood that participants will have
much to say without much prompting. If the topic is one about which the
participants feel passionately and will have much to say, a group of
three to five is ideal. Groups larger than that, especially for heated
topics, can easily become unmanageable. Some recommend that a group of
about six to ten participants is the ideal size for focus group research
while others recommend that groups should include three to twelve
participants. The size of the focus group is ultimately the researcher’s
decision. When forming groups and deciding how large or small to make
them, researchers must take into consideration what they know about the
topic and participants’ potential interest in, passion for, and feelings
about the topic. They must also consider their comfort level and
experience in conducting focus groups.

It may seem counterintuitive, but in general, it is better to form focus
groups consisting of participants who do not know one another than to
create groups consisting of friends, relatives, or acquaintances. The
reason for this is that groups who know each other may share some
take-for-granted knowledge or assumptions. In business research, it is
precisely the taken-for-granted that is often of interest; thus the
focus group researcher should avoid setting up interactions where
participants may be discouraged to question or raise issues that they
take for granted. However, groups should not be so heterogeneous that
participants will be unlikely to feel comfortable talking with one
another.

Focus group researchers must carefully consider the composition of the
groups they put together. In his text on conducting focus groups, Morgan
[@morgan1996focus] suggests that “homogeneity in background and not
homogeneity in attitudes” should be the goal, since participants must
feel comfortable speaking up but must also have enough differences to
facilitate a productive discussion. Whatever composition researchers
design for their focus groups, the important point to keep in mind is
that focus group dynamics are shaped by multiple social contexts.
Participants’ silences as well as their speech may be shaped by gender,
race, class, sexuality, age, or other background characteristics or
social dynamics, all of which might be suppressed or exacerbated
depending on the composition of the group.

In addition to the importance of advance planning, focus groups also
require skillful moderation. While a researcher certainly does not want
to be viewed as a stick-in-the-mud or as overly domineering, it is
important to set ground rules for focus groups at the outset of the
discussion. Participants should be reminded that they were invited to
participate because the researcher wants to hear from all of them.
Therefore, the group should aim to let just one person speak at a time
and avoid letting just a couple of participants dominate the
conversation. One way to do this is to begin the discussion by asking
participants to briefly introduce themselves or to provide a brief
response to an opening question. This will help set the tone of having
all group members participate. Also ask participants to avoid having
side conversations; sharing thoughts about or reactions to what is said
in the group is important and should not be limited to only a few group
members.

As the focus group gets rolling, the moderator will play a less active
role than in a one-on-one interview. There may be times when the
conversation stagnates or when the moderator wishes to guide the
conversation in another direction. In these instances, it is important
for moderators to demonstrate that they have been paying attention to
what participants have said. Being prepared to interject statements or
questions such as “I’d really like to hear more about what Sally and Joe
think about what Dominick and Ashley have been saying” or “Several of
you have mentioned…What do others think about this?” will be important
for keeping the conversation going. It can also help redirect the
conversation, shift the focus to participants who have been less active
in the group, and serve as a cue to those who may be dominating the
conversation that it is time to allow others to speak.

In sum, focus groups are a useful method for researchers who wish to
gather in-depth information about social processes. Focus groups are
similar to one-on-one qualitative interviews in many ways, but they give
researchers the opportunity to observe group dynamics that cannot be
observed in one-on-one interviews. Historically, focus group research
was more commonly used by applied researchers than by academics, though
in recent decades social scientists from all domains have discovered the
usefulness of focus groups for gaining understanding of social processes
and have begun using this method of data collection in their studies.

Summary {#ch10:summary}
-------

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Aenean commodo
ligula eget dolor. Aenean massa. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et

[^1]: All of the quotes in this paragraph were found at
    <http://guyland.net/>.

[^2]: Photo by Tom Cochereau on Unsplash

[^3]: NVivo information can be found at
    <http://www.qsrinternational.com>, RQDA at
    <http://rqda.r-forge.r-project.org/>, and Coding Analysis Toolkit at
    <https://cat.texifter.com/>
