Presenting Research
===================

Introduction
------------

Most researchers hope that their work will have relevance to others
besides themselves. As such, research is in some ways a public activity.
While the work may be conducted by an individual in a private setting,
the knowledge gained from that work should be shared with peers and
other parties who may have an interest. Understanding how to share
research is an important aspect of the research process.

What and With Whom to Share
---------------------------

When preparing to share work with others, researchers must decide what
to share, with whom to share it, and in what format(s) to share it. This
section considers the “what” and “with whom” aspects while later
sections cover the various formats and mechanisms through which research
is shared.

#### Sharing It All

Because conducting research is a scholarly pursuit and because
researchers generally aim to reach a true understanding of business and
economics processes, it is crucial that all aspects of research, the
good, the bad, and the ugly, are shared. Doing so helps ensure that
others will understand, be able to build from, and effectively critique
the work.

It is important to share all aspects of a research project for ethical
reasons and to permit other researchers to replicate the work. The
following questions will aid researchers in preparing to share research
with others.

1.  Why was the research conducted?

2.  How was the research conducted?

3.  For whom was the research conducted?

4.  What conclusions can be reasonably drawn from this research?

5.  How could the research have been improved?

Answering these questions help researchers be honest with themselves and
the readers about their own personal interest, investments, or biases
with respect to the work. The third question helps identify the major
stakeholders, like funders, research participants, or others who share
something in common with the research project (e.g., members of the
community or social group who were involved in the research). These
groups may be interested in the outcome of the research but may also be
a source of bias. The last two questions help identify the strengths and
weaknesses of the research project and could point the way for future
projects.

#### Knowing Your Audience

An important decision for researchers is determining with whom to share
the results. Certainly, the most obvious candidates with are other
researchers working in the same field. Other potential audiences include
stakeholders, reporters and other media representatives, policymakers,
and members of the public more generally.

While the findings of a research project would never be altered for
different audiences, understanding the audience helps frame the research
report in a way that is most meaningful to that group. For example, the
report for a project about the spending habits of elderly pensioners may
be much different if rendered for a group of business owners, a
governmental committee on aging, the funding agency, and a community
meeting. In all cases, researchers would share the study’s major
findings, but the method of presentation and level of detail would vary
by audience.

It would be expected that the greatest amount of detail, including data
collection method, sampling, and analytic strategy, would be shared with
colleagues and the funding agency. In addition, the funding agency may
want information about the exact time line for the project along with
any bureaucratic hiccups encountered. With a community meeting, though,
a more succinct summary of the important findings using less technical
jargon would be appropriate.

### Oral Presentations

Researchers frequently make presentations to their peers in settings
like conferences or departmental meetings. These presentations are
excellent means for feedback and help researchers prepare to write up
and publish their work. Presentations might be formal talks, either as
part of a panel at a professional conference or to some other group of
peers or other interested parties; less formal roundtable discussions,
another common professional conference format; or posters that are
displayed in some specially designated area.

When preparing a formal talk, it is very important for researchers to
get details well in advance about the time limit for the presentation,
requirements for questions from the audience, and whether visual aids,
such PowerPoint slides, are expected. At conferences, the typical formal
talk is usually expected to last between 15 and 20 minutes. Once
researchers start talking about something as as important as their own
research, it is common for them to become so engrossed that they forget
to watch the clock and finds themselves running short of time. To avoid
this all-too-common occurrence, it is crucial that presenters practice
in advance, and time themselves.

One common mistake made in formal presentations of research work is in
setting up the problem the research addresses. Audience members are
usually more interested to hear about the researcher’s work work than to
hear the results of a long list of previous related studies. While
written reports must discuss related previous studies, presentations
must use the precious time available to highlight the current research
project. Another mistake is to simply read the research paper verbatim.
Nothing will bore an audience more quickly than hearing a presenter
drone on while reading aloud. Finally, a presentation should highlight
only the key points of the study, which, generally, include the research
question, methodological approach, major findings, and a few final
takeaways.

In less formal round table presentations, the aim is usually to help
stimulate a conversation about a topic. Normally, several research
projects are presented so the time available for each is normally
shorter than in a formal presentation. Also, round table presentations
always includes time for a conversation following the presentations.
Round tables are especially useful when a research project is in the
early stages of development. For example, perhaps a researcher has
conducted a pilot study and is interested in ideas about where to take
the study next. A round table is also an excellent place for a preview
of potential objections reviewers may raise with respect to the
project’s approach or conclusions. Finally, round tables are great
places to network and meet other scholars who share common interests.

Finally, a poster presentation is a visual representation a research
project. Often, poster sessions are tables lined up in a conference area
where researchers have a visual display on the table but also stand by
to answer questions. A poster should not be just pages from the report
pasted onto a poster board, rather, researchers decide how to tell the
“story” of the work in graphs, charts, tables, and other images.
Bulleted points are acceptable as long as the people walking by can
quickly read and grasp the major argument and findings. Posters, like
round tables, can be quite helpful at the early stages of a research
project because they are designed to encourage the audience to engage in
conversation about the research. It is not necessary to share every
detail of a research project in a poster, the point is to share
highlights and then discuss the details with people who are interested.

### Written Presentations

Written reports that will be read by other scholars generally follow a
formal format that is outlined by the publication journal. However, most
scholarly reports include an abstract, an introduction, a literature
review, a discussion of research methodology, a presentation of
findings, and some concluding remarks and discussion about implications
of the work. Reports written for scholarly consumption also contain a
list of references and many include tables or charts that visually
represent some component of the findings. Reading published research in
business or economics is an excellent way to develop an understanding of
the core components of scholarly research reports and to begin to learn
how to write those components.

Reports written for public consumption differ from those written for
scholarly consumption. As noted elsewhere in this chapter, knowing the
audience is crucial when preparing a written report. Whoever your
audience, it is important to keep in mind that scientific evidence is
being reported. Writers must take seriously their roles as business
researchers and be mindful of their place among peers in the discipline.
Findings must be presented as clearly and honestly as possible;
appropriate recognition must be afforded to the scholars who have come
before, even if the research raises questions about their work; and
readers should be engaged in a discussion about the research and
potential avenues for further inquiry. Normally, research writers will
never meet the readers face-to-face, but it is beneficial to imagine
what the readers would ask and provide a detailed response in the
written report.

Finally, it is extremely important to not to commit plagiarism in a
research report. Presenting someone else’s words or ideas as if they are
the researcher’s own is among the most egregious transgressions a
scholar can commit. Indeed, plagiarism has ended many careers (Maffly,
2011) \[4\] and many students’ opportunities to pursue degrees (Go,
2008). \[5\]

### Disseminating Findings

This section focuses on disseminating the written results of a research
project. Dissemination refers to “a planned process that involves
consideration of target audiences and the settings in which research
findings are to be received and, where appropriate, communicating and
interacting with wider policy and…service audiences in ways that will
facilitate research uptake in decision-making processes and practice”
(Wilson, Petticrew, Calnan, & Natareth, 2010, p. 91). \[1\] In other
words, dissemination of research findings involves careful planning,
thought, consideration of target audiences, and communication with those
audiences. Writing up results from a research project and having others
take notice are two entirely different propositions. In fact, the
general rule of thumb is that people will not take notice unless they
are encouraged to do so. To paraphrase the classic line from the film
*Field of Dreams*, just because you build it does not mean they will
come.

Disseminating research findings successfully requires determining who
the audience is, where that audience is located, and how to reach them.
When considering who the audience is, think about who is likely to take
interest in the research project. The audience might include those who
do not express enthusiastic interest but might nevertheless benefit from
an awareness of the research. Of course, the research participants and
those who share some characteristics in common with those participants
are likely to have some interest in what was discovered in the course of
the research. Other scholars who study similar topics are another
obvious audience for the work. Perhaps there are policymakers who should
take note of the work. Organizations that do work in an area related to
the topic of the research project are another possibility. Finally, any
and all inquisitive and engaged members of the public represent a
possible audience for the work.

Where the audience is located should be fairly obvious once the
composition of that audience is determined. The research participants
are known since they were part of the study. Interested scholars can be
found at professional conferences and via publications such as
professional organizations’ newsletters and scholarly journals.
Policymakers include state and federal representatives who, at least in
theory, should be available to hear a constituent speak on matters of
policy interest. Organizations that do work in an area related to the
research topic can be found with a simple web search. Finally,
disseminating findings to the general public could take any number of
forms: a letter to the editor of a local newspaper, a blog, or even a
Facebook post.

Finally, determining how to reach the target audience will vary
depending on which specific audience is of interest. The strategy should
be determined by the norms of the audience. For example, scholarly
journals provide author submission instructions that clearly define
requirements for researchers wishing to disseminate their work via that
journal. The same is true for newspaper editorials; check your
newspaper’s website for details about how to format and submit letters
to the editor. To reach out to political representatives, a call to
their offices or a simple web search should information about how to
proceed.

Researchers who have conducted high-quality research and have findings
that are likely to be of interest to any constituents besides themselves
would have a duty as a scholar to share those findings.

Summary {#ch15:summary}
-------

Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetuer adipiscing elit. Aenean commodo
ligula eget dolor. Aenean massa. Cum sociis natoque penatibus et
